National Strategy for Financ2ia0l 12

              Education
                                           2

                                   Table of Contents

                      Content                                            Page Number

           Acknowledgements                                              3

Section I

A. Introduction and Background                                           4-8

B. Vision, Mission, Goals, Strategic Action Plan and Stakeholders        8-10

          Section II Assessment of the Need for Financial Education

A. National Survey on Financial Education                                10-11

B. Assessment through Complaints and Creation of Complaints              11

Database

C. Assessment of needs through international experience                  11-12

D. Efforts made so far in the field of financial education - RBI, SEBI,  12-16

IRDA, PFRDA, FMC and market players

E. Mapping of financial education content in school curricula            16

                    Section III Policy Design

A. Components of Financial Education

1. Basic Financial Education                                             17-19

2. Sector Focused Financial Education

3. Product Education

B. Content of Financial Education                                        19-20

C. Financial Education for women                                         20

D. Financial Education for the illiterate                                20-21

E. Financial Education for the differently abled                         21

F. Delivery Channels for Financial Education                             21-24

Section IV Institutional Arrangement                                     24-25

Section V Guidance

Guidance to Regulators                                                   26-27
Guidance to Industry Associations

Guidance to Commercial Financial Institutions

Guidance to Self Help groups and Others

Guidance to other authorities

Section VI Peer Review and Comments                                      28-31
                                                               3

                                                    Acknowledgements

A proposal for drafting a National Strategy for Financial Education along with the initial document was
presented by Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) at the first meeting of the Technical Group of
the Sub- Committee of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) on Financial Inclusion and
Literacy on November 11, 2011. The document received wide appreciation from all regulators who were
part of the said Technical Committee and it was decided that a sub group was formed comprising of
representatives from Reserve Bank of India, SEBI, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
(IRDA), Pension Funds Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), and Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs, acting as FSDC Secretariat and Department of Financial Services) to
take the idea forward including the fine tuning the document in respect of national strategy, examine the
contours of conducting a national survey to ascertain the needs of the country with regard to financial
literacy and interface with the committee constituted by CBSE for curriculum development in schools.

Since then, several rounds of consultations/ discussions/ meetings by the technical committee of the sub
group for have taken place and various suggestions from RBI, SEBI, IRDA, PFRDA and Forward Markets
Commission(FMC) had been incorporated. The document was placed on the websites all regulators for
public comments on July 16, 2012. Comments were received from various stakeholders including banks,
exchanges, NGOs and other public institutions apart from individuals. The comments received were
reviewed and suitably incorporated in the document.

The document was also sent for peer reviews and suggestions from Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) and Financial Services Board (FSB), South Africa has also been
appropriately incorporated.

The secretariat expresses sincere acknowledgements to all regulators, OECD and FSB, South Africa along
with institutions and individuals from whom comments have been received to finalise the document
                                                          4

                                                Section I
                                 A. Introduction and Background

1. The first decade of the twenty-first century has seen a universal recognition for
    spreading financial literacy among people. The concept of improving financial
    literacy as a national project has been gradually evolving Most countries have
    adopted a unified and coordinated national strategy for financial education. Given
    the fact that India has a large population, is a fast growing economy with national
    focus on inclusive growth and has an urgent need to develop a vibrant and stable
    financial system, it is all the more necessary to quickly formulate and implement
    a national strategy for the country. Also, since a large number of stakeholders,
    including the central and state governments, financial regulators, financial
    institutions, civil society, educationists and others, are involved in spreading
    financial literacy, a broad national strategy is a prerequisite to ensure that all the
    stakeholders work in tandem according to the strategy and not at cross
    purposes. The formulation and implementation of National Strategy for Financial
    Education will reap rich benefits to the country and can be attributed to following
    reasons:
    Inclusive Growth, Financial Inclusion and Financial Education
    Financial education plays a vital role in making the demand side respond to the
    initiatives of supply side interventions. Financial inclusion is a top most policy
    priority of the Government of India. One of the most visible aspects of
    governance has been the agenda of social inclusion, of which financial inclusion
    is an integral part. As the Hon’ble Union Finance Minister, Shri Pranab
    Mukherjee, said in his speech at the Reserve Bank of India - Organization for
    Economic Cooperation and Development Workshop on Delivering Financial
    Literacy in March 2010, “Financial literacy, and education, plays a crucial role in
    financial inclusion, inclusive growth and sustainable prosperity”.
         a) Knowledge and skill: Increasing range and complexity of financial
             products has made it very difficult for an ordinary person to take an
             informed decision. Financial literacy imparts knowledge and skills and,
             thereby, confidence to the ordinary person to manage financial products
                                                5

    and services and enabling him to have more control over his/her present
    and future financial well being.
b) Freedom from exploitation: Financial literacy helps protect the society
    and individuals against exploitative financial schemes and exorbitant
    interest rates charged by moneylenders.
c) Avoidance of over-indebtedness: Financial education will help avoid
    over-indebtedness, improve quality of services and promote wise financial
    decisions.
d) Promoting entrepreneurship: Awareness about financial products will
    help small entrepreneurs, who are educated and who already have
    business sense, understand dynamics of market mechanism and improve
    their business dealings.
e) Positive spill-over effects: Financial education can lead to multiplier
    effects in the economy. A household that is well educated in financial
    matters would resort to regular savings, which, in turn, would lead to
    investments in right channels and greater income generation. The
    financial well being of individuals will, in turn, increase the welfare of the
    society.
f) Reducing strain on social programmes: A financially aware person
    would be in a better position to assess his/her own requirements and
    make savings in appropriate schemes. It reduces strain on social
    programmes and pension plans and fosters a more resilient economy.
g) Behavioral change: The proliferation of financial products has led to its
    indiscriminate usage without users realising their financial implications. “In
    fact, the recent global financial crisis has raised the question whether
    individuals’ lack of financial knowledge led them to take out adjustable rate
    mortgages or incur credit card debt they could not afford. Financial
    education can become an agent of behavioral change.
h) Deeper participation in financial markets: India needs to convert savers
    into investors. Greater participation of domestic retail investors in
    securities market will make securities market deeper. Domestic savers will
    also reap the benefits of corporate growth.
                                                          6

2. OECD defines financial literacy as a combination of financial awareness,
    knowledge, skills, attitude and behavior necessary to make sound financial
    decisions and ultimately achieve individual financial well being. People achieve
    financial literacy through a process of financial education.

3. OECD defines financial education as “the process by which financial
    consumers/investors improve their understanding of financial products, concepts
    and risks and, through information, instruction and/or objective advice, develop
    the skills and confidence to become more aware of financial risks and
    opportunities, to make informed choices, to know where to go for help, and to
    take other effective actions to improve their financial well-being”.

4. According to OECD, a framework of National Strategy for Financial Education
    promotes a smoother and more sustainable co-operation between regulators and
    stakeholders, avoids duplication of resources and allows development of
    articulated and tailored roadmaps with measurable and realistic objectives based
    on dedicated national assessments.
    Globally, countries like Czech Republic, Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, and
    the UK have already adopted National Strategy for Financial Education, while
    many other countries are in the process of formulation and implementation.

5. In India, majority of population is financially excluded and coexists with various
    other financially included sections of population which invest in capital markets
    and use other advanced financial products. It, therefore, needs a tiered approach
    for a national strategy to include spreading awareness about basic financial
    products and link the excluded to the formal financial sector, educating the
    existing users of financial products and services to enable them to make
    informed choices and ensuring consumer protection for all the users of financial
    products and services. Based on this trilogy of needs, the key components of the
    national strategy could be a continuum of financial literacy, financial education
    and consumer protection.

6. The key components of financial literacy efforts could be some of the following
    simple messages:
     Why save?
     Why invest?
                                                          7

     Why insure?
     Why financial planning?
     Why do you need a regular stream of income, like pension, post working life?
     Why save or invest regularly and consistently?
     Why insure fully?
     Why save with banks?
     Why borrow within limits?
     Why borrow from banks?
     What is the difference between saving and investment?
     Why borrow for income generating purposes?
     Why repay loans?
     Why repay loans in time?
     Why do you need insurance?
     What is interest? How moneylenders charge very high interest rates?
     Why and how to evaluate the various product options available?
     What are the do's and don'ts of investment?
     What are the rights and responsibilities of an investor?
     What are the mechanisms available for redressal of grievances?

7. The key components of financial education efforts could be:
    a) Understanding the key financial products one may need throughout
         one’s life including bank accounts, insurance, retirement savings plans and
         securities market investments like stocks, bonds and mutual funds.
    b) Understanding basic financial concepts like compound interest, present
         and future value of money, annuity, investment return, risk, protection and
         diversification.
    c) Developing skills and confidence to be aware of financial risk and
         opportunities and to benefit from them.
    d) Making good financial choices about saving, spending, insurance,
         investing and managing debt throughout one’s life, for example, for getting
         education, while starting a job, buying a house, during mid-life, getting ready
         to retire and during retired life.
                                                               8

    8. The key components of consumer protection efforts at the higher end of financial
         education could be:
        a) Creating awareness at the district, State and national levels through
              consumer protection fora and providing quick and easy access to these
              bodies for the users of financial products and services.
        b) Providing quick and easy access to various financial sector ombudsmen as
              well as strengthening their network and reach across country.
         We, thus, need to clearly articulate a national strategy for financial education so
         that all stakeholders on board.

             B. Vision, Mission, Goals, Strategic Action Plan and Stakeholders

    1. Vision - A financially aware and empowered India
The vision entails providing financial education to all Indians to enable them, depending
upon their level of need, to understand the role of money in their life, the need and use
of savings, the advantages of using the formal financial sector and various options to
convert their savings into investments, protection available to them through insurance
and a realistic recognition of the attributes of these options.

    2. Mission - To undertake rigorous financial education campaign to help people
         manage their money more effectively and achieve financial well being by
         accessing appropriate financial products and services offered by regulated
         entities having fair and transparent mechanism for consumer protection and
         grievance redressal.

The mission envisages conducting financial education campaigns across the country for
all sections of the population along with awareness campaigns at different levels for
existing and potential customers so as to improve their knowledge, understanding, skills
and competence in managing money effectively and to improve their financial status by
taking informed decision.
                                                               9

The mission will be accomplished through provision of financial education throughout
the life cycle of an individual starting from the school level. The endeavour is to ensure
well being of individuals through financial inclusion.

    3. Goals - National Strategy for Financial Education has been prepared with the
         following objectives:
        a) Creating awareness and educating consumers about access to financial
                 services, availability of various types of products and their features.
        b) Changing attitudes to translate their knowledge into behaviour.
        c) Making consumers understand their rights and responsibilities as users of
                 financial products and services.

    4. Action Plan with Timeframe - The mission will be accomplished only through a
         strategic action plan to be executed in a five-year period. The Strategic Action
         Plan for Financial Education could include:
             a) To set up the structure as envisaged in this document.
             b) To incorporate basic financial education in school curricula up to senior
                  secondary level.
             c) To create awareness about consumer protection and grievance redressal
                  machinery available to users of financial products and services.
             d) To deliver financial education by trained persons in a format suitable to
                  each target group with the content that has been developed after rigorous
                  research.
             e) To undertake all these measures through various stakeholders, including
                  Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) and civil society, and to use all
                  channels of mass communication.
             f) To establish initial contact with 500 million adults and to educate them
                  about key products in savings, protection and investment so that they are
                  empowered to take prudent financial decisions.

    5. Stakeholders - The strategy recognises the following stakeholders. The list is
         indicative, not exhaustive.
         a) Financial consumers - Individuals resident in India
         b) Financial market players - Financial institutions that act as savings
             aggregators, namely, banks, non banking financial companies, mutual funds,
                                                               10

             pension funds, insurance companies, etc., and financial institutions that act as
             intermediaries, such as, brokers, merchant bankers, registrars, depositories,
             exchanges, insurance brokers, corporate agents, etc., and professional
             institutes like ICSI, ICAI, ICWAI, etc.
         c) Educational institutions
         d) Non governmental organisations
         e) Financial sector regulators
         f) Government – both Central and State
         g) Multilateral/ international institutions, like OECD, G-20, INFE, etc.

                                                    Section II
                        Assessment of the Need for Financial Education

                              A. National Survey on Financial Education

1. Several countries, such as, Australia, New Zealand, France and the USA have
conducted a detailed survey on the state of financial literacy in their own countries.
These surveys mainly concern topics relating to money management, financial planning
as well as choosing and buying products. International Network on Financial Education
(INFE) has also conducted a survey on financial literacy across 12 countries. Further,
cross country surveys have been carried out for school students and adults. The results
of the survey serve various purposes, namely,
Identifying the needs and gaps.
Establishing the direction of the effort.
Identifying special groups, such as women and illiterates, that need attention
Serving as an evaluation and benchmarking standard so that the result of future
initiatives can be compared with these baseline numbers.
2. While the groups in India may be different in view of large scale financial exclusion, it
is necessary that as a very first step towards financial literacy, a nationwide sample
survey may be conducted through an expert agency to assess the state of financial
inclusion and financial literacy. The survey should have the following elements:
                                                               11

The state of financial inclusion, that is, whether the person has savings account, loan
account, mutual fund investment, insurance policy, pension plan, depository account,
etc.
The state of awareness of financial products, that is, whether he/she is aware of many
types of savings and investments options available to him/her.
The state of financial competency, that is, whether he/she understands the concept of
compound interest, present value of money, annuity, etc.
His/her attitude towards money, that is, whether he/she prepares a budget, or considers
drawal from credit cards as normal means of financing.
His/her attitude towards risk.
Whether the person has any pension coverage for old age and, if so, the nature of
pension that is available.
3. Once the initial assessment is done, market players could report their assessment of
incremental progress to regulators. An effort in this regard is underway across
regulators through a Technical Group of the Sub Committee of Financial Sector
Development Council (FSDC).

       B. Assessment through Complaints and Creation of Complaints, Database
1. The database of complaints available with regulators gives an insight into the areas
where financial education could improve consumer awareness of various products and
also help address gaps in consumer protection.
2. To effectively use this repository, there is a need to systematically collect, monitor
and analytically study the complaints.

                   C. Assessment of Needs through International Experience
1. In India, in view of large scale financial exclusion, the needs of financially illiterate
and excluded may be different from those of other countries where large sections of
populations are financially included. A cursory look at the literature, however, shows
that the basic issues in financial education for those already included are not different in
most countries. The international survey indicates the broad directions that India should
take. Nevertheless, a systemic study by a dedicated team will be worthwhile.
Ideally, the work of designing the campaigns should be carried out after the results of
the survey are available. However, it should be possible to start working in this area as
we are lagging behind other countries in this field. Even in developed countries, the
                                                               12

state of financial inclusion is far from satisfactory, the financial knowledge quite limited
and attitudes either too cavalier or totally risk averse. Some work has already been
done by regulators, such as, RBI, SEBI, IRDA, PFRDA and FMC and by NGOs and
microfinance institutions. For determining the initial approach, this existing volume of
work should be sufficient.

                    D. Efforts made so far in the Field of Financial Education
1. RBI’s initiatives on Financial Education
The Reserve Bank of India has undertaken a project titled “Project Financial Literacy”.
The objective of this project is to disseminate information regarding the central bank and
general banking concepts to various target groups, including school and college
students, women, rural and urban poor, defense personnel and senior citizens. The
project envisages a multi pronged approach. The project has been designed to be
implemented in two modules - one module focusing on the economy, RBI and its
activities, and the other module on general banking. The material is created in English
and other vernacular languages. It is disseminated to the target audience with the help
of its own offices, banks, local government machinery, schools and colleges, NGOs and
other voluntary groups through presentations pamphlets, brochures, films and also
through RBI’s website. Apart from this, RBI also organises town hall and outreach visits
in which all the top executives participate and disseminate information about economy,
banking and RBI. It also arranges visits of school and college students to RBI. Since
last year it has started an annual quiz programme for students of classes VII to XI to
generate their interest in economy, banking and RBI.
2. SEBI’s Initiatives on Financial Education
The Securities Exchange Board of India has embarked upon financial education
programmes through a nationwide campaign. To impart financial education to various
target segments, namely, school and college students, working executives, middle
income group, home makers, retired personnel, self help groups, etc., SEBI has
empanelled Resource Persons throughout India. The Resource Persons are trained on
various aspects of finance and equipped with the knowledge of financial markets. These
SEBI Certified Resource Persons organise workshops for these target segments on
various aspects, namely, savings, investment, financial planning, banking, insurance,
retirement planning, etc.
                                                               13

SEBI also conducts investor education programmes through investor associations all
over the country. It also conducts regional seminars through various stakeholders,
namely, stock exchanges, depositories, Association of Mutual Funds in India,
Association of Merchant Bankers of India, etc. SEBI has a dedicated website for
investor education in which study material is available on financial markets, products
and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on various subjects. SEBI also publishes study
material in English and vernacular languages. Under ‘Visit SEBI’ programme, school
and college students are encouraged to visit SEBI and understand its functioning. SEBI
has set up SEBI Helpline such that through a toll free number, investors across the
country can access and seek information for redressal of their grievances and guidance
on various issues. SEBI has also launched an investor education campaign through
media. The service is available in 14 Indian languages.
SEBI’s Complaint Redress System (SCORES) is web-based, centralised grievance
redress system where investors can view the action taken and the current status of the
grievance online. SCORES has also been integrated with the Centralised Public
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS)1.
3. IRDA’S Initiatives on Financial Education
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority has taken various initiatives in
the area of financial literacy. Awareness programmes have been conducted to convey
simple messages about the rights and duties of policyholders, channels available for
dispute redressal, etc. These have been disseminated through television and radio as
well as print media in sustained campaigns in English, Hindi and 11 other Indian
languages. IRDA conducts an annual seminar on policy holder protection and welfare
and also partially sponsors seminars on insurance by consumer protection bodies.
IRDA has conducted a pan India survey on awareness levels about insurance which
was carried out through NCAER in a bid to improve its strategy of creating insurance
awareness. IRDA has published ‘Policyholder Handbooks’ as well as a comic book
series on insurance.

1 The Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System, is an online web-enabled
system developed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC) in association with the Department
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG) with an objective of speedy redress
and effective monitoring of grievances by Ministries/Departments/Organisations of Government
of India.
                                                               14

As part of its consumer education initiative, IRDA has launched an exclusive website
(www.policyholder.gov.in) for education of policyholders. The website encompasses
generic useful information on buying insurance, standard claim procedures/
documentations, Do’s and Don'ts for a policyholder, general alerts, dealing with
intermediaries and FAQs, etc. The website has been found to be useful and has
become quite popular.
IRDA’s Integrated Grievance Management System (IGMS) creates a central repository
of grievances received from across the country and provides analyses of data indicating
areas of concern to the insurance policyholders.
4. PFRDA’s Initiatives on Financial Education
The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority has been engaged in
spreading social security messages to the public. PFRDA has developed FAQs on
pension related topics which is available on its website. It has been associated with
various non-government organisations in India for taking pension services to the
disadvantaged community.
PFRDA’s initiatives have become more broad-based with direct mass publicity on
National Pension Scheme (NPS) – both as individual model through Points of Presence
(POPs)2 and as group model through Aggregators. Aggregators are intermediaries
appointed by PFRDA who are directly responsible for pension awareness mostly in
vernacular languages and in line with socio-economic realities . PFRDA directly
provides information relating to NPS to Aggregators and entities in identified
occupational groups. PFRDA has issued advertisements in print and electronic media.
Under Swavalamban, PFRDA regularly provides guidance and training to Aggregators
on product specifications and operational responsibilities. Standard advertising material
and training presentations are shared to ensure standardisation of product information.
5. FMC’s Initiatives on Financial Education
Forward Markets Commission (FMC) with headquarters at Mumbai, is the regulator of
the commodity futures market in India. Futures markets enable farmers, producers,

2 An individual can open an NPS account with authorised branches of service providers called ‘Points of
Presence’ (POPs). One, thus, has the option to shift from one branch to another branch of a POP at
his/her convenience.
                                                               15

cooperative societies, corporate bodies, exporters, Micro Medium & Small Enterprises
etc. to hedge against price volatility.
During the 11th FYP the Commission initiated various market development programmes
like awareness programmes, capacity building programmes and stakeholders meetings
to create awareness and enhance knowledge about the futures market. Apart from
emphasizing the utility of the markets, the awareness programmes educate the
participants about how to participate in the market and the precautions to be taken in
this regard. The programmes conducted at various locations across the country are
attended by different categories of stakeholders like farmers, traders and members of
Commodity Exchanges, bankers, teachers, researchers, students of Universities,
Government functionaries, warehouse professionals, etc. The capacity building efforts
of the Commission complement the awareness creation activities of the Commission.
The training programmes, are organized in association with various management and
cooperative management institutes. Apart from these, sensitization programmes are
organized by the Commission for senior State Government and Central Government
officers. Besides, the Commission every year organizes a number of stakeholders’
meetings at different parts of the country to get to know the views of various
stakeholders on the various aspects of the commodity futures trading including the
difficulties faced.

Apart from these, during the 11th FYP the Commission has also launched a Price
Dissemination Project which is aimed at informing the farmers about spot and future
prices through the price ticker boards installed at APMCs / Mandis and places with
frequent farmer footfalls.
Also as part of the Jago Grahak Jago campaign launched by the Govt. during the 11th
FYP the Commission conducted client awareness campaigns through various national
and vernacular newspapers and electronic media. The Commodity Exchanges also
undertake a number of media campaigns to educate investors as well as other
stakeholders regarding these markets. The Commission has also produced handbooks
of FAQs and Do’s and Don’ts in the commodity market. The Commission and
Exchanges also participate in conferences, seminars, symposiums and exhibitions on
futures market every year.
                                                               16

6. Market Players’ Initiatives on Financial Education
Commercial banks are increasingly realising that they are missing out on a large
segment of financially illiterate and excluded segment of prospective customers. Also, in
view of the national emphasis on electronic benefit transfer, commercial banks have
initiated various measures to create awareness through Financial Literacy and
Counselling Centers (FLCC) and Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (R-SETI) for
financial literacy. The objective of these centers is to advise people on how to get
access to the financial system including banks, creating awareness among the public
about financial management, counselling people who are struggling to meet their
repayment obligations and help them resolve their problems of indebtedness and help
rehabilitate borrowers in distress. Some of these credit counselling centers even train
farmers/women groups to enable them to start their own income generating activity and
earn a reasonable livelihood. Even top management of commercial banks is
undertaking outreach visits to villages with a view to spreading financial literacy.
Similarly, many stock exchanges, broking houses and mutual funds have taken
initiatives in the field of financial education that spans conducting of seminars, issuance
of do’s and don’ts and awareness campaigns in newspapers. Insurance companies too
undertake campaigns and other educational activities for generic education in
insurance.
It will be necessary to collate all the material developed by these institutions and classify
it in the light of the approach outlined in this strategy paper. The material, suitably
augmented, should form the kernel of knowledge base envisaged in the strategy.

          E. Mapping of Financial Education Content in the School Curricula
The most effective way to impart financial education is, however, to weave it into the
school curriculum. For example, compound interest is taught in Arithmetic but as an
abstract concept. This can be turned into an opportunity in financial education by
teaching the concept through live example of calculating interest for a company that has
borrowed from a bank or for a bank customer who has opened a cumulative deposit
account vis-à-vis another customer who has a simple fixed deposit account. Similar
opportunities are available in the syllabi of Social Studies, Moral Science, etc.

                                                   Section III
                                                 Policy Design
                                                               17

                                 A. Components of Financial Education
    1. Basic Financial Education
The fundamental tenets of financial well being are: importance and advantages of
savings, necessity of staying out of unproductive loans that are beyond one’s capacity
to repay, borrowing from formal financial sector, concept of interest and the power of
compounding, time value of money, inflation, need to insure, retirement planning role of
major financial sector institutions and agencies, such as Government, regulators, banks,
stock exchanges, insurance companies and pension funds and basic concept
regarding relation between risks and returns. These basic concepts have to be
explained to everyone, especially to those who are at present financially excluded.
However, the means of communication can be different depending upon who is the
recipient. School children, for instance, can be reached best through school curricula,
working class can be reached through employers, home makers through NGOs and so
on. The content and method of presentation has also to be tailored according to the
target groups. A large number of financially excluded, rural population will have to be
reached through the network of rural branches of banks and lead district managers of
banks. The content, however, has to be sector neutral and should impart general
lessons in prudent financial behavior.
Considering the scale of efforts involved, Ministry of Human Resources Development
(MHRD), Government of India may take the lead in ensuring inclusion of financial
literacy material in school curriculum across India through coordination with various
boards, ministries and state governments. The Ministry of Finance (MOF), Government
of India may be the facilitator for inclusion of course material pertaining to financial
literacy in school curriculum through MHRD. Support for course content development
and monitoring may be provided by all concerned as envisaged in Section IV.
    2. Sector Focussed Financial Education
This component is targetted at largely already financially included or consumers of
financial products and services.
The various sectors including banking, securities market, insurance, retirement planning
and commodities market can be covered. Information relating to institutions, instruments
and risks in all these sectors should constitute financial education for financially
included.
                                                               18

Bank related financial education, for instance, should consist of details, such as,
responsibilities under Negotiable Instruments Act, precautions while dealing with ATMs
and net banking, fundamentals of payment system, lockers and safe custody, loans and
guarantees, fixed versus floating rates of loans, etc. Similarly, education for actual
potential investors in securities market may consist of basics of stock exchange
mechanism, clearing and settlement mechanism, dematerialisation and depositories,
and role of various intermediaries, such as, brokers, merchant bankers, registrars,
transfer agents, underwriters, etc. Potentially risky areas, such as, margin trading and
derivatives need to be flagged. Various instruments, such as, shares, units of mutual
funds , corporate bonds, pension plans, etc., also need to be explained. Education
material on insurance has to cover the basic concepts related to insurance sector, life
and non life insurance including need for adequate cover, need to regularly pay
premium, etc. Retirement planning should be targeted at all persons in earning age
bracket and the role of Pension Fund Manager (PFM) / annuity service provider should
be explained to them. The role and functions of Aggregators in creating awareness
about the need for retirement planning and old age income security among the target
groups may need to be highlighted. The advice of ‘not putting all eggs in one basket’
while making investments needs to be explained.
Sector focussed financial education has to be totally product neutral. This could be
achieved by carefully designing the content. The risks of mis-selling and steps to ensure
understanding of appropriate and suitable products and services also need to be
highlighted in sector focussed financial education.
Considering their expertise and mandate, each regulator may be responsible for
designing/monitoring of study material and implementation of this objective in their
respective areas. RBI, for instance, may be responsible for banking sector while SEBI
may be responsible for securities markets. Similarly, IRDA ,PFRDA and FMC may be
responsible for insurance, pension and commodity futures market related education
efforts respectively. Support for content development and monitoring may be provided
as envisaged in Section IV.

    3. Product Education
                                                               19

Finally, when a financial sector consumer buys a product or is being convinced to buy a
product, it is necessary that he/she may first be educated about the particular product
that is being sold. Product education has to be neutral between the various available
options within that product range. The best agency for delivery of product education
would be the respective industry association. Thus, Indian Bank’s Association (IBA),
Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI), Association of National Exchanges
Members of India (ANMI), Stock Exchanges, Depositories, Fixed Income Money Market
and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA), Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India
(FEDAI), Life Insurance Council, General Insurance Council, etc. may have to play an
important role in financial education by undertaking general awareness campaigns or
tby ensuring availability of literature comparing the available alternatives at the points of
sale.

 The crucial part of product education, however, lies with the manufacturer of the
product. For financial products, it would be banks, insurance companies, mutual funds,
stock exchanges, pension funds and commodity exchanges who may have to take the
responsibility of educating the buyers about the appropriateness of the product,
performance under various possible scenarios, charge structure, etc. through simple
examples. Product education can be, and should be, delivered primarily at the point of
sale.
The role of regulators will be to ensure that product manufacturers under their
jurisdiction impart product education in general and at points of sale in particular.
Further, regulators will have to ensure that product education is comprehensive, simple
and factual.

                                    B. Content of Financial Education
1. Attitude
Financial education must seek to impart responsible attitude towards money and
finance. In certain population groups, not caring for the future and living for the moment
might be the dominating values. Such attitudes are inimical to long term financial well
being.
2. Financial Competencies
Core financial competencies, such as, interest calculation, compounding, time value of
money, etc., need to be identified and suitably incorporated in financial education
                                                               20

material. Achieving core financial competencies should be the primary aim of financial
education.
3. Risk Assessment and Confidence
Most of the time people are not able to achieve financial well being because of their
inability to properly assess the risk. They lack the confidence to take risk and their
financial assets consistently underperform. Building such confidence should also be part
of financial education.
4. Awareness Regarding Available Grievance Redressal Mechanisms
Apart from the existence of an effective grievance redressal mechanism, it is important
that investors/consumers are indeed aware of various consumer protection and
grievance redressal mechanisms available to them. It is very important that the
investors are aware of whom and where to approach in case of a dispute/ grievance.
This would lead to enhancing the confidence of investors and may primarily be the
responsibility of regulators, Ministry of Finance,Ministry of Consumer Affairs, etc.
Investor grievance redressal mechanism may be a topic in all the components of
financial education, that is, in basic financial education in sector focused financial
education, and in product education.

                                    C. Financial Education for women
As per the World Bank's latest World Development Report (2012 World Development Report on
Gender Equality and Development ), women represent 40% of the world’s labor force but hold
just 1% of the world’s wealth. The women of rural India is no exception and are often left
behind by the traditional financial system which includes savings at home, loans from
money lenders etc. It is agreed that improving access to economic opportunities for
women acts as one of the key priority areas for development of an economy and
financial inclusion. Hence, as said " You educate a man; you educate a man. You educate a
woman; you educate a generation", women as a target group will be prioritized during the
first phase considering that there are matriarchal societies in our country.

                                 D. Financial Education for the Illiterate
Illiterate persons are in dire need of financial education. Illiterate people need not have
to wait for alphabet knowledge as money has its own language, in as much as even the
illiterates understand the importance, value and use of money. The traditional
                                                               21

curriculum, methodology and delivery channels have to be different and innovative to
impart financial education to the illiterate. As argued earlier, simple messages
advocating financial prudence like importance of savings, borrowing within limits and
using formal financial intermediaries, may be brought out for them. Methodologies
employed for adult education, such as role play, charts, informal discussions, games,
and other audiovisual modes of communication, would be ideal for such groups.

                           E. Financial Education for the Differently Abled
The differently abled account for nearly 10 percent of the Indian population and number
approximately 100 million. They are possibly the most marginalised section of the
society with respect to access to, and information on, financial products. It is very
important to recognise the right of differently abled to financial education and set out
specific strategy for customisation of financial education programmes, content, delivery
channels etc. for them.

                            F. Delivery Channels for Financial Education
1. School Curriculum
Governments have recognised that financial education should start at school and that
people should be educated about financial matters as early as possible in their lives.
OECD has developed guidelines aimed at providing high-level international and non-
binding guidance to assist policymakers and interested stakeholders in designing,
introducing and developing efficient financial education programmes in schools. The
guidelines specify a consistent and suitable framework for integration of financial
education into school curricula. These guidelines can be adapted as necessary for
developing curriculum while keeping in mind national requirements and diversity of
educational systems.
It needs to be clearly specified that financial education would not be another subject
taught in schools. Rather, financial education needs to be appropriately integrated into
the school curriculum. For instance, Arithmetic curriculum in school already has
elements of financial education as it explains concepts such as percentage, interest,
compounding, discount, etc. These need to be presented in a setting wherein the
teachers can make the students identify their day-to-day transactions/financial dealings.
Similarly, moral science courses could have content which will promote prudent
financial behavior.
                                                               22

Financial education is an important life skill. Therefore, students should be equipped
with these necessary life skills, without which education would be incomplete. In India,
there are many who do not get an opportunity to study beyond school levels. This is
truer in case of girl students. One must keep it in mind that for such students, this could
be the last opportunity in life to get formal inputs on financial education. An annex
indicating probable topics for school curriculum is enclosed.
The Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) in India has appreciated the need of
financial literacy in building capacity to handle personal finance in an informed and
skilful way. It is heartening to note that CBSE has agreed, in principle, to introduce it in
an integral manner in school education (Post Primary Level) and to facilitate the
process, a committee of experts has been constituted.
2. Social Marketing
Various Ministries of Government of India have undertaken commendable programmes
of social marketing, such as, polio and small pox eradication, prevention of child
marriage, preventing female foeticide, etc. These campaigns can serve as models for
undertaking social marketing initiatives in financial education.
There is a possibility of making use of -

     Dedicated Financial Education websites
     Newspapers
     Radio and Television
     Use of Social Networking Websites like Facebook and Twitter
     Books / magazines in ‘Cartoon Format’ for young people
3. Resource Persons
SEBI engages Resource Persons across the country to impart financial education to
various target groups. This initiative needs to be taken further and scaled up
exponentially. Another easily scalable model as mentioned earlier for large sections of
poor people could be conducting literacy courses across the country through rural
branches and Lead District Managers of banks.
4. Adult Education
Financial education should form an integral part of adult education.
5. Self Help Groups
                                                               23

Self Help Groups (SHGs), by their design, have helped spread financial education. SHG
discipline requires groups to maintain accounts, make budgets and repay the loans.
These are basic values in financial education. The good work needs to be carried
forward and put on a firm basis.
6. Microfinance Institutions
Many NGOs have been running successful financial education programmes for their
borrowers. These programmes need to be dovetailed to the overall strategy for people
in other areas.
7. Integrated Communication Channels
While channels like TV, radio, news papers and internet should be exploited fully for
financial education, there is a need to also leverage existing extension works and
projects carried out by various Ministries, such as, the Ministry of Agriculture’s
efforts to spread knowledge through panchayats, etc., for promoting financial
education.

8. Helpline
There is a need for multi lingual, toll free helplines where an investor/ customer / client
can call and get friendly assistance / support. All regulators can think of a helpline, if
they have not already done so. It can play an important role in financial education.
9. Other Channels
There is a possibility of making use of other established channels, such as, consumer
associations, investors associations, association of policy holders and depositors’
association. These associations are already working towards making their members
aware of their rights and responsibilities in a particular product category. They can
further the cause of financial education. Stock exchanges, Association of Mutual Funds
in India (AMFI), Association of National Exchanges Members of India (ANMI),
depositories, Self Regulatory Organisations (SROs) associated with regulators,
regulated intermediaries like banks, depository participants, brokers, pension fund
managers, annuity service providers, etc., can play an important part in making a
person financially educated. They can make their consumers/ clients / investors aware
of their rights and responsibilities. This can be done as part of product marketing.
                                                               24

Professional institutes like Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), Institute of
Company Secretaries of India (ICSI), Institute of Costs Accountants of India (ICAI), etc.
too can play a significant role in promoting financial education.

                                                   Section IV
                                               A. Institutional Arrangement
The national strategy is sought to be implemented through existing institutional
mechanism. The existing Technical Group of the Sub-Committee of FSDC on Financial
Inclusion and Financial Literacy could be morphed into this. This group may be
responsible for periodic monitoring and implementation of National Strategy for
Financial Education
A national level institute named, National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE) may
be established as a specialised institute under National Institute of Securities Markets
(NISM) to begin with. This institute may report to the Technical Group for
Implementation of National Strategy for Financial Education.
Representatives of the regulators may be members of the NCFE. All regulators may
provide funds and manpower to NCFE for implementation of National Strategy for
Financial Education
The main role of NCFE may be to create financial education material for financial
sector. NCFE may also create and maintain a website exclusively for financial
education. The websites of all the regulators and the respective Ministries may provide
a link to the NIFE website. NCFE website may have the details of various education
programmes conducted across the country, financial education materials, including
brochures, FAQs, videos, etc. All educative materials prepared by individual
organisations may also be made available on the NCFE website. The website may be a
one-stop repository for all financial education activities and materials. The website may
also be made available in various regional languages.
                                                               25

The proposed institutional flow chart is:

                                                           FSDC
                                                    S
                                           Sub-Committee of FSDC

            Technical Group on Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy

     MoF for       Other       RBI         Representatives from  SEBI  IRDA              PFRDA  FMC
  Facilitation /                            CBSE, NCERT and
   MHRD for        Ministries
Implementation                                  two SCERTs

  Basic Financial         Basic (FE) for                               Basic (FE) for adults
  Education (FE)               adults                                  Sector specific
 through schools
                          Sector specific
                                                                       Product specific
                               Product
                               specific

                                           NCFE

  Maintenance of               Development       Research              Data collection
financial education              of content                            and monitoring

       website
                                                               26

                                                    Section V
                                                    Guidance
Guidance to Regulators
     Extend help to National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE) in designing the
         content of basic financial literacy programmes.
     Provide domain expertise to NCFE by deputing experts to NIFE for short
         duration.
     Extend help to NCFE by acting as interlocutor and facilitator between NIFE and
         the regulated entities.
     Use their resources for spreading financial education, both basic and sector
         specific through various channels.
     Create a financial education cell or department to outline the content of the
         sector specific financial education that would serve as source material for both
         NCFE and commercial financial institutions.
     In areas where there is no active industry association, the regulators may also
         develop the content for financial education.
     Create clear guidelines for product development by commercial financial
         institutions and lay down parameters for product education.
     They should submit reports in prescribed formats to NCFE on a regular basis on
         their activities in the field of financial education.
Guidance to Industry Associations
      Develop the content for sector specific financial education within the framework
         laid down by the sectoral regulator. The content should be freely shared through
         a website accessible to all.
      Use resources to spread financial education, both basic financial literacy and
         sector specific financial education through various channels on their own accord
         and through the good offices of their members.
      While conducting a programme on basic financial literacy, use the content
         developed by NCFE.
      Eensure that their resources are not used for promoting specific products.
                                                               27

      Submit reports in prescribed formats to NIFE on a regular basis on their activities
         in the field of financial education.

Guidance to Commercial Financial Institutions, including Microfinance Institutions
      Understand that their most important contribution to financial education is
         through a professional level product education that will allow the consumers to
         make informed choices.
      They may, as a part of their corporate social responsibility, help the industry
         association in spreading both basic financial literacy and sector specific financial
         education. However, they have to strictly adhere to the content developed by
         NCFE and industry associations / sectoral regulator.
      Submit reports in prescribed formats to NCFE on a regular basis on their
         activities in the field of financial education.

Guidance to Self Help Groups and Others
     They may participate in spreading financial education, both basic financial
         literacy and sector specific education as per their inclination. However, they
         should strictly use the content developed by the NCFE and the industry
         association / sectoral regulator.
     They should submit reports in prescribed formats to NCFE on a regular basis on
         their activities in the field of financial education.

Guidance to Other Authorities
     Other authorities, such as, education boards, agricultural and health extension
         services may also like to participate and extend their infrastructure in spreading
         financial education. While making these efforts they should, however, use the
         content developed by NCFE or the industry association/ sectoral regulator.
                                                               28

                                                   Section VI
    1. Comments on the draft Indian National strategy on Financial Education - OECD

General Comments:

The document provides a fair and solid analysis of why a national strategy on financial
education is needed in India, who are the main stakeholders involved so far, who may be
the main target audiences and content of the national strategy in keeping with the overall
structure of the OECD/INFE high level principles. The document also usefully defines some
objectives and time frame for the strategy, a coordination structure as well as stakeholders
responsible for the implementation of the strategy.

Depending on the objective of this document, it could be further developed and possibly
more rigorously articulated in order to provide a more operational roadmap which could
then be used during the implementation phase of the strategy. The detailed comments
below offer some guidance on how to do this based on the review of other National
strategies.

Detailed comments

     The document should include a table of contents to guide the reader ( some editing
         may also be needed)

     Some figures on the level of financial inclusion and literacy as well as households’
         financial behaviours and status would nicely illustrate the first section.

     There is some discussion about the types of information and knowledge that people
         require. This could be expanded and used to set specific and predetermined
         objectives with clearly stated timeframes. It may also be relevant within the list of
         key components (p5) to list ‘how’ questions, in order to cover essential skills.

     There is some discussion of target groups. Further information could be provided to
         indicate why these have been chosen as priorities, and how the strategy intends to
         reach them.

     There is some discussion on objectives and time frame. This section could be
         developed to provide a more operational action plan for the various involved
                                                          29

    stakeholders (clear objectives for each stakeholder with a timetable for action). This
    section can come after the section which defines the institutional mechanisms
 Product education: this section should highlight the risk of conflict of interest and
    discuss ways through which financial institutions can effectively deliver education
    the development of codes of conduct for the industry may be considered. The link
    with financial consumer protection could be more clearly stressed
 The section on coordination/institutional mechanisms should be further elaborated
    as this is an essential part of the strategy and it efficient implementation. The role
    and composition of the NIFE and how it will be funded should in particular be
    developed and clarified. In addition, the rationale for the creation of the NIFE should
    be further elaborated as well as its relation with other regulators activity in the area
    of financial education. The activity of the NIFE will also have to be monitored and
    supervised to ensure the high quality of financial education.
 The proposed institutional flowchart is illustrative. It would benefit from further
    discussion in the text to explain how the proposed chart was developed and how the
    structure would be implemented and governed i.e. how contact between the various
    institutions would be maintained and how supervision would work in practice. The
    document could further explain how each of these sets of stakeholders could work
    in a synchronised way.
 The guidance should also encourage the organisations to set objectives/targets, and
    evaluate against these.
 A way to evaluate the efficiency of the National strategy and the activities of the
    various stakeholders should be discussed. Usually, this is done through regular
    national surveys on financial literacy or the development of a specific financial
    literacy indicator (see New Zealand and South Africa).

Implementation could be covered in greater detail:

 There is no discussion of financial resources needed for implementation. This is a
    critical part of the National strategy and one which would be worth at least
    mentioning.

 Some delivery methods are mentioned; this could be expanded.
                                                               30

     Further discussion in relation to training the trainers may be helpful, given the
         range of stakeholders who may be expected to provide financial education.

    2. Comments on the draft Indian National strategy on Financial Education –
         Financial Services Board of South Africa

The National Strategy for Financial Education in India is a comprehensive document with a very
ambitious set of proposals. It provides extensive detail regarding the need to increase the levels of
financial literacy of people in India, subsequent benefits, some current initiatives, identifying needs,
who should be involved in the further provision of financial literacy programmes, target groups,
possible topics, delivery mechanisms and institutional arrangements for driving the
implementation of the strategy.

The impression gained from reading the document, however, is that is more of a proposal rather
than a strategy. It suggests what could and should happen, who should be involved, possible topics
for inclusion in schools, an indicative list of stakeholders, the possibility of a nationwide survey
being carried out by different regulators under the auspices of NCAER, etc. A final strategy could
look a lot different once all the stakeholders mentioned have met and identified the strengths and
weaknesses of the FSDC as a coordinating agency, decided how fund will be sourced, estimated
what funding will be available. Strategic measures that are feasible, achievable and measurable
could then be identified that will give a strategic document more credibility and feasibility.

It is not clear whether the proposed agencies have met and if not, this document may be somewhat
premature and could have more credence if it were compiled once the proposed agencies and
stakeholders have met and agreed on:

     Who will have ownership of the strategy and be responsible for its implementation i.e. who
         specifically will coordinate efforts and their roles and responsibilities are clarified.

     Financial education needs are identified and a responsive framework of learning outcomes
         compiled.

     Sources of funding are identified and availability confirmed.
     How the sample surveys will be coordinated and how they will be used to form a composite

         national needs analysis.
     A clear definition of the concepts of financial literacy within an Indian context. A long list of

         topics applicable to both the community and learners in schools currently provided needs
         to be prioritised and certainty provided as to why these topics are selected. Perhaps an
                                                           31

      overarching framework of financial literacy competencies needs to be developed that will
      promote financial inclusion within a regulated financial environment.
  How the defined financial literacy competencies need to be developed and how they will be
      used to promote inclusion.

  Key deliverables and their timelines for implementation.

The points raised in the peer reviews are taken on board. It is noted that, most of these or the underlying
issues have been discussed by the technical committee which has drawn up the National Strategy for Financial
Education having representation from all regulators and the Government of India along with special invitees
from boards setting academic standards in schools(CBSE etc.), organisations like NCERT, NCAER etc. and
National Institute of Securities Markets which will act as the initial agency for implementation of the strategy.

Further, as suggested in the peer reviews, the following changes have been incorporated in the document
     The document includes a table of content to guide the reader. The said section details the flow and
         sequence of all the chapters and section of the document
     Brief details of the genesis of the document and the contributions of the various stakeholders have
         been highlighted in the 'Acknowledgement' section. This also elaborates on the process followed till
         date.

It is reiterated that this document is a result of all regulators and Government of India having a common
agenda of core financial education to all. Regarding the issue of funding, though a consensus has already
emerged that the same would be contributed by all the regulators. Further, regarding the implementation of
the strategy, ownership and coordinating the efforts and the role of stakeholders, Core committee formed with
members from all regulators will be responsible who will finally report to FSDC chaired by Hon'ble Finance
Minister of the country.

The results of the national survey proposed will help us detailing the strategy to the extent as suggested in the
peer review to address the concerns regarding target groups, detailed action plan, time frame etc. will get
redressed. A committee has been formed to look into the various aspects of the survey including the
questionnaire, sample size, methods of sampling and subsequent evaluation after implementation of the
strategy.
