Securities and Exchange Board of India

“The content of the book is developed by Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) under the guidance
of the Advisory Committee for the Investor Protection and Education Fund (IPEF) of Securities
Exchange Board of India (SEBI)”
(Graphics and print design by MCX-SX and FTKMC)
Disclaimer
Financial Education initiatives of the SEBI are for providing general information to the public.
For specific information on securities law, rules, regulations, guidelines and directives framed
thereunder, please refer to the same at www.sebi.gov.in
Published by:
Securities and Exchange Board of India, (SEBI)
SEBI BHAVAN
Plot No.C4-A, ’G’ - Block, Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai 400051
Tel: +91-22-26449000 / 40459000 / 9114
Fax: +91-22-26449027 / 40459027
E-mail: fefeedback@sebi.gov.in

Every effort has been made to avoid errors or omission in this publication. Nevertheless any mistake,
errors or discrepancy noted may be brought to the notice at the above mentioned address which
shall be rectified in the next edition. It is notified that the publisher will not be responsible for any
damage or loss to any one, of any kind, in any manner from use of this material.
No part of this book may be reproduced or copied in any form or by any means (graphic or
mechanical, including photocopy, recording, taping or information retrieval systems) or reproduce
on any disc, tape, perforated media or other information storage device, etc. without the written
permission of the publisher. Breach of this condition is liable for legal action.

2
TABLE OF  1. Need for Financial Planning
CONTENTS
          2. Importance of Understanding Household Finances

          3. Basics of Savings & Investments
               · Budgeting
               · Inflation Effects on Investments
               · Risk and Return
               · Power of Compounding

          4. Investment Options Available
               · Investment Options
               · Investment Philosophies
               · Protection Related Products

          5. Need and Importance of PAN Card

          6. Understanding Ponzi Schemes

          7. Nominee and His Rights

          8. Women Centric Products

          9. Education Planning for Children

          10. Security Tips on ATM Card & PIN

          11. A Housewife’s Guide to Investing in Gold

          12. Borrowing Related Products

                                                             3
1. NEED FOR FINANCIAL PLANNING

Financial planning isn’t just for ‘some’ people – financial planning is for everyone. Financial
planning is one of the most important life skill. It is the process of meeting your life goals
through the proper management of your finances. A bad financial plan may lead you to
financial problems while; a good plan can provide you and your family with a comfortable life.
Unfortunately, many think financial planning is just about money. That’s not true – money is
just the start.
Just like a house needs a strong foundation to withstand the elements, you need to have a
solid financial foundation. Creating your financial foundation requires that you have the basics
covered. Your life goals include buying a home, saving for your children’s education, managing
debt or planning for retirement.
Personal finance covers a wide variety of money topics including budgeting, expenses, debt,
saving, retirement and insurance among others. Understanding how each of these topics work
together and affect each other is important for laying the groundwork for a solid financial
foundation for you and your family.
It is a six step process that helps you take a ‘big picture’ look at where you are and where you
want to be financially. Using this process helps you work out what you need to do now and in
the future to reach your goals.

4
2. IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING
   HOUSEHOLD FINANCES

Often only one person in the household is responsible for maintaining the family budget and
managing household’s finances.

What if you/your partner died or became incapacitated and could no longer manage the
budget? You need to follow the following steps:-

Maintain a household budget
Get a big picture idea of all the money in play – the income, the debts, the recurring expenses,
the investments and so on.

Understand your family finances and fill out a budget and a balance sheet. The purpose of
these two financial tools is to give you a financial snapshot of your finances. Remember, if you
put clean honest data in, you will get a true picture of your financial situation.

Understand and estimate your current spending patterns
Constant debits:- EMI (equated monthly installment) payments, car loans, taxes are the
amounts that are debited every month
Changing debits:- Electricity, phones, groceries and more utilities that are dependent on the
usage. Bills for these services fluctuate and must be recorded on a monthly basis

Make sure you have access to everything
Just knowing that you own various assets won’t be enough. If you want to take charge, you
should have full access. Get a set of keys to any safety deposit boxes, make sure you are named
account holder or the primary beneficiary on all major accounts, life insurance policies and
property you own. Also ensure that you open a separate account in your name with a nominee
(for emergencies) so that you can control some part of the finances.

Understand everything and why it is important
People tend to complete tasks more successfully when they understand the purpose of what
they are doing. Just hearing from your partner that “this account is where we put our savings”
isn’t as good as explaining why you choose to put your savings there. Saying that we get the
best interest rate at this bank helps.

Gradually share with your partner some financial responsibility
If you currently don’t handle the money at all, start off with a small manageable task-
preferably one with low stakes. For example, be responsible for paying one small bill each
month - something with a generous grace period on the payment due date, like the electric
bill. As you become more adept, manage additional tasks. Eventually, handle all the finances
for one month (with supervision, of course). Then, let your partner switch off for months, with
you handling the finances every other month until you both feel completely comfortable. This
way you will not only boost your self confidence while handling financial matters, it will also
provide freedom to your partner to think on other issues of the family.

Discuss contingency Plans
Make sure you know what your partner would do in an emergency or unplanned financial
event. Don’t just be conceptual - discuss actual, concrete strategies to handle unplanned
events. Example:- if there was a sudden loss of income, which bills would need to be prioritized,
and which expenses could be reduced or dropped altogether.

                                                                                                                               5
3. BASICS OF SAVINGS & INVESTMENTS

In many instances the terms saving and investment are used interchangeably.

However in an economic sense, savings is the excess of income over expenditure. And
investment is the process of routing savings into optimal returns bearing assets.

The objective of savings is to save for the rainy day or to meet unforeseen eventualities. A
person saving money is interested in the availability of funds at a future date.

The objective of investments is growth, security or income.

Money used to purchase shares, debt instruments or used to buy any asset where there is an
element of capital appreciation/income is deemed an investment.

Investing means you’re setting your money aside for longer – term goals. There’s no guarantee
that the money you invest will grow. In fact, it’s normal for investments to rise and fall in value
over time. But in the long run, investments can earn a lot more than you can usually make in
a savings account.

Whether one’s income is small or large, setting aside some of it for investments requires self-
discipline. By maintaining discipline to postpone buying certain items now, you can enjoy the
longer term benefits of having that money work for you through savings and investments.

The Price of Postponing Investment
You know that the more time you have to invest, the more money you are likely to end up
having. But the flip side of that is true too. By waiting to invest, you’re paying an opportunity
cost. It’s easy to say that you don’t have enough money to start saving and investing now. – “I’d
rather wait until I have more money.” But that decision probably costs you more than you think
because the power of compounding works both ways. It costs you because waiting means
giving up earning compound interest from even just a small amount of money.

Budgeting

The first step in your financial planning is budgeting. Budgeting is a process for tracking,
planning and controlling the inflow and outflow of income. It entails identifying all the sources
of income and taking into account all current and future expenses, with an aim to meet an
individual’s financial goals. The primary aim of a budget planner is to ensure savings after the
allocation for spending.

Benefits of budgeting -
• It helps in planning and controlling excessive expenditure
• It can help refine goals based on realistic resources
• Helps in decision making
• Helps in using funds efficiently

6
Steps for budget planning:-
• Determine available funds (cash on hand, funds in the bank, interest etc)
• Estimate expected income and when it is expected to be available
• Define needed expenses. Rank the order of expenditure by their importance
• Eliminate less essential expenditure or limit expenditures
• Set and maintain a minimum cash balance
• Revise, review, cross reference and then assemble into a final budget.
• The budget should be flexible to anticipate conditions which might have been overlooked

    during the planning process
• Once finalised it should be closely monitored

Other Key Points
• When estimating income that is highly variable, the estimate should be conservative. Being

    surprised by an income surplus is far more pleasant than having an unexpected shortfall
• If the budget is planned too tight, adherence to it may become an issue
• Review your budget regularly, make changes if new expenses are anticipated

Realize that unexpected things come up in life. You may have to break your budget plan, or
reconstruct it, occasionally. However try to avoid debt to cover the shortage and stick to your
budget as much as possible.

Inflation effects on Investments

When you are planning your investment, it is critical that you take into account the effects of
inflation on your investments. At its most basic level, inflation is simply a rise in prices. This
means that, over time, as the cost of goods and services increase, the value of a rupee is going
to go down because you won’t be able to purchase as much with those rupees as you could
have in the last month or last year.

How does inflation affect my investment decision?
This is the question on many investors’ minds and it is especially important issue for people
living on fixed income, such as retirees.

The impact of inflation on your portfolio depends on the type of securities you hold. If you invest
only in stocks then inflation should not be much of a worry. Over the long run, a company’s
revenue and earnings should increase at the same pace as inflation.

Fixed-income investors are the hardest hit by inflation as they are particularly vulnerable to the
effects of inflation. If you are locked into a particular interest rate, and if inflation increases your
earnings will not keep up and you may earn a negative real return.

Example:-
Suppose that a year ago you invested Rs 1,000 in a bond with a 10% yield. Now that you are
about to collect the Rs 1,100 owed to you, is your Rs 100 (10%) return real? Of course not!
Assuming inflation was positive for the year, your purchasing power has fallen and, therefore,
so has your real return. We have to take into account the chunk inflation has taken out of your
return. If inflation was 6% p.a., then your real return is really 4% p.a. only because items that
you purchase for Rs 1,000 will now be Rs 1,060 (6% inflations rate) and therefore your real
return is only Rs 40 and Rs 100.

What are the steps that an investor can take to avoid the adverse effects of inflation?
Try to determine your “real rate of return” which is the return you can expect after factoring in
the effects of inflation. In addition to being aware of the current rate of inflation, it is crucial
to be aware of what inflation rate the experts are anticipating. Both the value of current

                                                                                                                               7
investments and the attractiveness of future investments will change depending on the
outlook for inflation.

Risk and Return

Risk and investing go hand in hand. Risk can be defined as the chance one takes that all or part
of the money put into an investment can be lost. The good news is that investing risk comes
with the potential for investing reward – which is what makes the whole process worthwhile.

Low levels of uncertainty (low risk) are associated with low potential returns, whereas high
levels of uncertainty (high risk) are associated with high potential returns. According to the risk-
return tradeoff, invested money can render higher profits only if it is subject to the possibility
of being lost.

Because of the risk-return tradeoff, you must be aware of your personal risk tolerance when
choosing investments for your portfolio. Taking on some risk is the price of achieving returns;
therefore, if you want to make money, you can’t cut out all risk. The goal instead is to find an
appropriate balance - one that generates some profit, but still allows you reasonable safety of
your investment.

Types of Risk
When most people think of “risk” they translate it as loss of principal. However, there are many
kinds of risk. Let’s take a look at some of them:-

Capital Risk: Losing your invested monies
Inflationary Risk: Investment’s rate of return doesn’t keep pace with inflation rate
Interest Rate Risk: A drop in an investment’s interest rate
Market Risk: Selling an investment at an unfavourable price
Liquidity Risk: Inability to convert your investment into cash when you need it
Legislative Risk: Changes in tax laws may make certain investments less advantageous
Default Risk: The failure of the institution where an investment is made

Remember risk can never be eliminated altogether, but it can be managed.

Power of Compounding

Compounding is a simple concept that offers astounding returns: if you park your money in
an investment with a given return, and then reinvest those earnings as you receive them, your
investment grows exponentially over time. With simple interest, you earn interest only on the
principal (that is, the amount you initially invested); with compounding, you earn interest on
the principal and additionally earn interest on the interest.

Just to give an example:-
Assuming Mala and Gita invest Rs.1,00,000 this year. Both of them earn an interest of 10% p.a.
However, Mala has invested in a simple interest scheme, where the interest is given to her every
year. However, Gita has invested in a scheme with compounded interest. So, at the end of 1st
year, both of them will have earned interest of Rs.10,000. However, in the 2nd year, Mala invests
the same Rs.1,00,000 and gets interest of Rs.10,000. However, Gita’s investment increases to
Rs.1,10,000 and her interest earned increases to Rs.11,000. As the years increase, the income
for Gita also increases proportionately. This is the power of compounding, essentially useful for
meeting long term financial goals.

Compounding, thus, is a wonder tool that lets you make the most of small investments made
over long periods of time to accumulate phenomenal wealth. It works best if you start investing
early, and leave the money alone. Compounding is, in fact, the single most important reason
for you to start investing right now. Every day you are invested is a day that your money is
working for you, helping to ensure a financially secure and stable future.

8
4. INVESTMENT OPTIONS AVAILABLE

The choice of the best investment options will depend on personal circumstances as well as
general market conditions. An investment for one objective may not suit the needs of the
other. Right investment is a balance of three things: Liquidity, Safety and Return. Liquidity
means the ease of converting investments to cash. Some liquid investments are required to
meet exingencies. Safety refers to the level of risk of the investment. Some investments may
promise high returns while the money may be lost. However, investments which offer decent
returns and safe return of principal are most suitable. Inflation is a risk, which reduces the
real income of an investment. Return refers to the income generated by the investment. Risky
investments offer high or no returns and safe investments offer steady but lower incomes.

There are several short-term and long-term financial investment options available, some of
which are given below. These are covered in brief the details of these are available in the Part
A material of Financial Education Programe.

Investment Options

Banks
The first type of investment option is the deposits and accounts in banks. They offer savings
bank accounts, recurring deposit accounts and fixed deposit accounts. The chief feature here is
safety but lower return and also offer high liquidity. Saving accounts are highly liquid but carry
low interest. These can be used for day-to-day expenses and exingencies. Fixed deposits carry
higher interest and can be used for planning for short to medium term goals like education,
etc. The recurring deposit schemes are useful for putting away money every month.

Government Schemes

The Government of India has launched many Income Tax Saving Schemes including:
• National Savings Certificates (NSC)
• Public Provident Fund (PPF)
• Post Office Scheme (POS)

Besides, ELSS offered by Mutual Funds and Infrastructure Bonds of Financial Institutions /
Banks also offer tax benefit.

The incomes from investments are exempt from Income Tax and the investments in these
schemes are deductible subject to certain limits from the taxable income. These are especially
useful for tax planning and are also safe investments. Beside tax benefit is available for
ELSS(Equity Linked Savings Scheme) and Infrastructure bonds.

Bonds

A Bond is a loan given by the buyer to the issuer of the instrument, in return for interest. Bonds
can be issued by companies, financial institutions, or even the Government. The buyer receives
interest income from the seller and the par value of the bond is receivable by the buyer on the
maturity date which is specified. Bonds could be Tax Saving Bonds or Regular Income Bonds

                                                                                                                               9
Debentures

These are similar to bonds, but are issued by companies. There are different kinds of debentures,
which can be offered. They are as follows:
• Non convertible debentures (NCD) – Total amount redeemed by the issuer
• Partially convertible debentures (PCD) – Part is redeemed and part is converted to equity

    shares with or without the option to the investor
• Fully convertible debentures (FCD) – Whole value is converted into equity. The conversion

    price is stated when the instrument is issued

Company Fixed Deposits

These are similar to bank fixed deposits, issued by companies to attract small investors.
However, they are repayable only on maturity. They offer attractive interest rates, however,
they are insecured. Ratings are guide to investor for safety.

Mutual Funds

A mutual fund is a body corporate that pools money from many investors and invests the
money in stocks, bonds, short-term money-market instruments, other securities or assets,
or some combination of these investments. The combined holdings the mutual fund owns
are known as Assets under Management. Each share represents an investor’s proportionate
ownership of the fund’s holdings and the income those holdings generate.

They are a useful tool of investment for those who are not well-versed with the securities
markets. They are professionally managed by fund managers who are well trained. The risk is
spread out by owning shares in a mutual fund instead of owning shares and bonds.

Various Types of Mutual Funds

Each fund has a predetermined investment objective that tailors the fund’s assets, regions of
investments and investment strategies. At the fundamental level, there are three varieties of
mutual funds:
• Equity funds (stocks)
• Fixed-income funds (bonds)
• Money market funds

Mutual Funds can also be classified as open-ended or closed-end, depending on the maturity
date of the fund. Open-ended funds do not have maturity date and their units can be purchased
or sold from / to Asset Management Company. Closed-end funds have specific maturity date,
after which the investment is refunded and are can also be listed on a stock exchanges.

Open-ended Funds
• An open-ended fund does not have a maturity date
• Investors can buy and sell units of an open-ended fund from / to the Asset Management

    Company (AMC), at the mutual fund offices or their Investor Service Centres (ISCs) or
    through the stock exchange.
• The prices at which purchase and redemption transactions take place in a mutual fund are
    based on the net asset value (NAV) of the fund

Closed-end Funds
• Closed-end funds run for a specific period
• On the specified maturity date, all units are redeemed and the scheme comes to a close
• The units shall be listed on stock exchanges to provide liquidity.

10
• Investors buy and sell the units among themselves, at the price prevailing in the stock
    market

The other types of funds are variants and the investor can choose the type of fund depending
on specific needs.

Equity Shares

Equity shares represent ownership in the company and they are listed and traded on stock
exchanges which facilitate buying and selling. The prime stock exchanges in India are The
Stock Exchange Mumbai, known as BSE and the National Stock Exchange known as NSE. The
stock exchanges facilitates coming together of buyers and sellers, thus providing liquidity and
price discovery.

Investing in equities is riskier than and definitely demands more time and skill than other
investments. However, this risk also carries good rewards. In the long run, equities outperform
other modes of investment. Stocks are probably the best bet against inflation too.

There are two ways in which investment in equities can be made:
• Through the primary market (by applying for shares that are offered to the public)
• Through the secondary market (by buying shares that are listed on the stock exchanges)

Investment Philosophies

                      Rate of return  Rate of       Risk  Liquidity Tax Benefit Convenience

                                      return

                      Annual Income   Capital
                                      Appreciation

Financial Securities  Low             High          High High  Yes       High
Equity                Medium
Non-convertible                       Low           Medium Average Nil   High
Debentures            Low
Financial Securities  Nil             Nil           Low High   Yes       High
(Non-securitized)     Nil             Medium                             High
Bank deposits                         Average       Nil   Low  Yes       High
Provident fund        Low
Life insurance        Medium          High          Nil   Low  Yes       High
Mutual funds                          Average                            High
Growth/equity         Low                           High High  Yes
Income/debt           Nil             Medium                             Average
Real assets                           Low           Low High   Yes       Average
Real estate
Gold/silver                                         Low Low    Nil

                                                    Average Average Nil

The table contains indicative figures from the past experience, they are of no guarantee. Investors are requested to make their own decision and bear in mind that market investment are
subject to risk.

INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHIES

• Evaluate risk of every investment
• Have clarity on short term and long term needs of the family
• Decide the investment based on the needs
• Do not invest in any scheme that you do not understand
• Do not invest on trust. Have everything backed up by documents

                                                                                                                             11
• Take into account tax implication of every income
• Do not blindly follow market tips and rumours
• Anything that appears unnaturally high or low will have some hidden catch
• Do not invest in schemes where you may protect the interest but lose the principal
• Equity investment are subject to market risk. study your investment option well before

    investing.
• Before investing in share market, study financial of the company,history, background of

    the promoters and objectives of the issue and its future prospects.
• Read and properly understand risk associated with investing in securities.
• Assess the risk return profile of the investment as well as liquidity and safety aspects before

    investment.

Protection Related Products

Insurance Policies

Insurance, as the name suggests is an insurance against future loss. However, although life
insurance is most common, there are other schemes that generate regular income and cover
other types of losses.

The products include Life Insurance, Term Life Insurance, Endowment Policies, Money Back
Policies, Annuity/Pension Policies/Funds, New Pension Scheme, 2009, etc.

Health Insurance

Health Insurance policies insure you against several illnesses and guarantee you stay financially
secure should you ever require treatment. They safeguard your peace of mind, eliminate worries
about treatment expenses, and allow you to focus your energy on more important things.

There are several health insurance or medical insurance plans in India. These can be divided
into the following categories based in the coverage offered:
• Comprehensive health insurance coverage
• Hospitalisation Plan
• Critical Illness Plans
• Specific Conditions Coverage

5. NEED AND IMPORTANCE OF PAN CARD

• The permanent account number or PAN has grown in importance and is today a vital part
    of any financial transaction. The tax department allots the PAN to an individual for the
    purpose of identification and to relate to various transactions and information pertaining
    to him.

• If your income exceeds the basic exemption limit, you should apply for PAN by May 31
    of the relevant assessment year. Any person whose turnover or gross receipts exceeds
    Rs.500,000 should apply for PAN before the end of the said accounting year

How to get a PAN card?
1. Application for PAN should be made in prescribed form (Form 49A) and submitted in any

    of the I-T pan service centres set up such as by Unit Trust of India Investor Services Limited
    (UTIISL) across the country

12
2. From July 1, 2003, I-T PAN Service Centres have been set up in all cities or towns where I-T
    offices are located. For further convenience of PAN applicants in major cities there will be
    more than one I-T PAN Service Centre

3. Location and other details about I-T PAN Service Centres in any city can be obtained from
    local Income Tax Office or offices of UTI or UTIISL in that city or from Web site of the Income
    Tax department (http://www.incometaxindia.gov.in) or of UTIISL (http://www.utiisl.co.in)

It is necessary to quote the PAN in documents related to the following transactions:-
1. Sale or purchase of immovable property valued at Rs 500,000 or more
2. Sale or purchase of a motor vehicle requiring registration other than two-wheelers
3. A time deposit of more than Rs 50,000 with any banking company and deposit of more

    than Rs 50,000 with post-office savings bank
4. Contract of sale or purchase of all securities including shares, bonds, debentures,

    derivatives, mutual fund units
5. Cash payment of Rs 50,000 or more for purchase of bank drafts, pay orders or bankers

    cheques in a day
6. Application for installation of telephone, including cellular telephone
7. Opening a bank account
8. Application for issue of a credit card
9. A cash deposit of Rs 50,000 or more with any bank during any one day
10. Payment of Rs 50,000 or more to a mutual fund for purchase of units or to a company for

    acquiring its shares or to a company/institution for acquiring its debentures/bonds or to
    RBI for acquiring bonds

6. UNDERSTANDING PONZI SCHEMES

A Ponzi scheme is a fraudulent investing scam that promises high rates at little risk to investors.
The scheme generates returns for older investors from their own money or money paid by
subsequent investors, rather than any actual profit earned. The perpetuation of the returns
that a Ponzi scheme advertises and pays requires an ever-increasing flow of money from
investors to keep the scheme going.

How to Spot one?
The Ponzi scheme usually entices new investors by offering returns other investments cannot
guarantee, in the form of short-term returns that are either abnormally high or unusually
consistent. In other words it seems too good to be true. Investor must be very careful about
such investment, there is nothing like extra ordinary returns.

The ultimate unravelling of a Ponzi scheme
• As more investors become involved, the likelihood of the scheme coming to the attention

    of authorities increases
• External market forces, such as sharp decline in the economy will cause many investors

    to withdraw part or all of their funds not due to loss of confidence in the investment, but
    simply due to underlying market fundamentals
• The scheme will collapse under its own weight as investment slows and the promoter
    starts having problems paying out the promised returns
• The promoter will vanish, taking all the remaining investment money

                                                                                                                             13
7. NOMINEE AND HIS RIGHTS

Inheritance has often been a bone of contention, with a plethora of community specific laws in
the country and the legal formalities and hassles that a family has to go through after a bread
winner has departed.

A nominee is like a trustee who basically takes care of the assets left behind by the owner and
is obliged under the law to distribute them among the legal heirs of the deceased.

What are the rights of a nominee over an asset? Does the asset become his when he
dies?
A nominee cannot assume ownership by virtue of the death of the original owner unless he is
a legal heir. And even then, he will have to get a succession certificate from the court stating
this fact.

If there is a will, it has to be duly authenticated by the court.

What is the procedure for making a claim?
It is more or less the same in case the owner dies leaving behind a will or dies intestate that is,
without making one. The legal heirs will have to file a petition in a court in their district. The
court will then advertise in the newspaper to invite objections, if any. If no one contests the
transfer of the ownership of the deceased’s assets, the court will clear the succession.

What happens when there is no nominee at all?
In such a case, the legal heirs will be required to apply for and obtain a certificate of succession,
on the basis of which the assets will be distributed among the heirs, in their respective
proportion.

Nomination need not be only for inheritance like property, etc., but also in all investments
including bank deposits, bonds, debentures, etc. It is advisable for the homemaker to have
separate bank and demat accounts in sole name and nominate someone like the husband,
child, etc. This gives a sense of independence and by investing wisely, you can satisfactorily
see your money grow.

8. WOMEN CENTRIC PRODUCTS

Are we still living in a man’s world? If one considers the rate at which women-centric banking
products are being launched, one may not be wrong in concluding that‘Woman Power’is here
to stay.

Today banking players are increasingly competing with each another to introduce innovative
products in order to address the diversified needs of women, hailing from all walks of life, be
it the urban working woman, the homemaker, the semi-urban entrepreneur or the rural self
help group (SHG) member.

14
Some women centric products offered by banks include:-
• Special Life Insurance Plans: some of the life insurance plans are exclusively for women.

    Such plans offer additional benefits for women that are not available in other plans
    available in the market. These benefits include coverage of congenital disability benefit,
    pregnancy complications etc.
• Special Health Insurance Plans: In some of the insurance plan Women Rider is an example
    of special rider exclusively for women.
• Bank Accounts with special benefits for women: some of the banks offer Smart Privilege
    Account for women. Through these accounts, women get the added advantage of special
    loan or deposit rates, facility of recurring deposits, lower minimum balance, etc.
• Women Debit and credit Cards: Some of the banks offer women specific cards with special
    benefits such as discount on locker fees; cash back facility, accidental insurance cover, free
    bill pay facility etc.
• Loan Schemes for Women: Various PSU banks are offer special loan rates for women. For
    some of the PSU banks offer lower (0.25% less) interest rate on home loans to women.
• Women-centric financial products aren’t just a marketing gimmick. The financial
    organizations have identified the special needs of women and are accordingly catering to
    these needs by way of such specialized products.

Given the choice, it might be preferable for women to choose a product tailored for women
over some general product available in the market. Always ask if there are special schemes
available, and compare the benefits of the women-centric products to the other products
available in the market. Additionally, make sure that you are not being charged a higher fee or
commission for choosing a product tailored for women.

9. EDUCATION PLANNING FOR CHILDREN

Educating your children is a major expense – the sooner you start saving for it the better.
Many parents believe that educating their children in private schools is worth it. But also the
financial burden is heavy. Further higher education in India, especially professional courses is
becoming expensive by the day. Cost of the professional education is quite steep and we need
to plan early.

While earlier a single income was more than sufficient, today even with two incomes we may
not be able to finance our children’s higher studies. Many parents pay school fees, as with
most household bills, on an ad hoc basis when they arrive in the mail. Many parents use their
general savings to pay school fees. And if you have to save for two kids, your investment just
doubles

Some available options include:

                                                                                                                             15
Insurance policies
• Insurance companies offer policies money back or endowment, which give a defined

    payout at a defined period.
• Herein, one keeps paying a premium every year and gets a lump sum amount when the

    child has grown-up and is ready for college. Such policies can be used to plan for the higher
    studies, if you have time on your side.
• Besides, if something unfortunate happens to the parent, not only does the child still get
    the sum assured on maturity, but the interim premiums are also waived off.
• However, the return from such policies is relatively low, barely covering the inflation. So it
    is possible that you may end-up with some shortfall in case the education expenses move
    higher than the average inflation levels.

Investment Products
• One can invest in pure investment options such as PPF, NSC, and Mutual Funds etc.
• There are many ‘child’ oriented investment products available in the market today. They

    may not always be a good investment option. In fact, there is no need to specifically go for
    child-oriented products. Even normal investment products like PPF, MFs etc., which suit
    your profile, can serve the purpose; many times in a much better manner
• However there is no need to panic. You would most likely be still in an earning phase
    when your child is ready to go to college (and getting much higher salaries), which can
    supplement your savings. You can always fill the gap in your savings with a small loan and/
    or a scholarship.

10. SECURITY TIPS ON ATM CARD & PIN

• Do not keep the PIN issued by the Bank together with your ATM Card.
• Change your PIN immediately when using your ATM Card for the first time and destroy any

    documents containing PIN information.
• Do not write down your PIN. You should memorise it.
• Do not send your PIN via email/SMS and never use the same PIN to access other services.
• Do not write down your PIN on the card face and do not disclose your PIN to anyone

    including any joint account holder.
• Do not, under any circumstances, disclose your PIN to anyone who claims to represent the

    Bank or who claims to be the Bank’s employee or other authorised person, or the police. It
    is not necessary for anyone to know your PIN. The Bank will never ask for your PIN by any
    means such as email, SMS, phone, etc.
• Do not use combinations that are readily accessible/deducible such as your identity card
    number, telephone number, date of birth, driver’s licence number or any popular number
    sequence (such as 987654 or 123456) for your PIN. Avoid using the same digit consecutively
    or the same sequence of numbers more than twice (such as 112233 or 383838) as a PIN.
• For security reasons, change your PIN regularly
• If you enter an incorrect PIN a certain number of times consecutively, your ATM Card will
    be captured by the ATM
• Be alert to your surroundings before conducting any banking transactions. Make sure no
    one sees your PIN and cover the keypad when you enter your PIN on any device, such as
    an ATM or other self-service terminal.
• Should you notice any suspicious devices at any ATM or any suspicious activities around
    you when performing an ATM transaction, cancel your transaction immediately and inform
    the Bank.

16
• When you have completed your ATM transaction, please retrieve your ATM Card as
    instructed on the ATM. Never try pushing your card back into the ATM.

• Remember to take your cash and ATM Card after each ATM cash withdrawal.
• Keep all transaction receipts and check them against your account records.
• Do not accept assistance from strangers. If you encounter any problems at the ATM,

    contact the Bank directly.
• If your ATM Card is lost or stolen, please inform your bank immediately.

11. A HOUSEWIFE’S GUIDE TO INVESTING IN
   GOLD

Gold- The king of the metals has a strong hold over our collective consciousness which is
perhaps incomparable. It is indeed rare to come across a housewife in India who does not
know the current price of gold. Imagine how convenient it would be if you could buy gold
from your home.

What has investing in gold got to do with the stock market?
You can invest in gold by buying units of gold Exchange Traded funds (ETFs). Gold ETFs
are mutual fund schemes which invest in gold. Mutual funds are regulated by Securities
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and are not to be confused with the unregulated and
unregistered chit funds. Gold ETF are special types of exchange traded funds (ETFs) which
tracks the prices of gold (i.e. whose value is based on price of gold) and are convenient and
inexpensive alternative to owning physical gold.As a retail investor you can peacefully invest
in gold through gold ETFs with the full assurance that they are governed by a proven legal
framework. Gold ETFs buy standard Gold (99.5% purity) and place it with custodian banks for
safekeeping. Against this gold, units are issued, which are equivalent to about 1 gram of gold.
These units are traded in the stock Exchange like any other share.

Advantages of Gold ETFs:
You can accumulate gold over a long period by buying say, one unit of gold ETF every month.
At the end of say 10-15 years, you will have sizeable investment in units, which you can readily
encash for your daughters/son’s marriage. Your investment in Gold ETFs are held in demat /
electronic form and can be traded on a stock exchange just like buying and selling stocks

Investment in gold ETFs eliminate the hassles and drawbacks of physical gold (e.g. impurity
risk), no loss on account of making charges, locker chagres of banks are more taxefficient and
allow you to invest in small amounts. However you will be charged for Demat account.

Returns of all Gold ETFs schemes are more or less similar to physical gold because they reflect
the price of gold in the spot market.

How to invest in Gold ETFs?
Gold ETFs are listed and traded on Stock Exchanges. They are held in demat form just like the
stocks. You require a DMAT account to invest in them (and for that you also require a PAN).
Besides, you also require to open a trading account with a broker. Typically, each unit in Gold
ETF represents one-tenth of an ounce of gold (1 gram). In other words, small sum is required
to gain exposure to the gold price for specific information on gold ETFs please visit stock
exchanges website or AMFI website.

                                                                                                                             17
12. BORROWING RELATED PRODUCTS

With today’s heightened cost of living, debts become a usual thing. A number of people apply
for personal loans, car loans, mortgage loans, and a whole lot of others. There seems to be a
loan for everything. Often, financial troubles begin as a result of too large debt.

DIFFERENT TYPES OF LOANS AVAILABLE
Personal Loans
Personal loans are usually taken when you have to meet unexpected needs that are beyond
a persons immediate financial means. People often get into financial trouble by taking out
personal loans just for the extra money, or to purchase frivolous items, and then find that they
can’t make the monthly payments required.

Key Features
• Be ready for high interest rates of 14-18% p.a, high fees and even higher monthly

    instalments
• The application process can be time consuming, taking weeks to be approved and funds

    disbursed, quite impractical for those unexpected immediate needs
• Rates and terms of the personal loans can vary tremendously, careful comparison is

    wise, helping to ensure that the consumer does not pay more than necessary for those
    emergency funds
• Take your time and do the homework before taking a personal loan
• Not advisable except for emergency requirements

Housing Loan
A home loan is just another loan with your house as the collateral. If you are buying your
first home then it is important to understand the ins and outs of home loans. There are many
variations according to the economy and what the market is doing that determines things that
are going to apply to your home loan.

Key Features
• Banks finance 75-80% of the property value
• Banks have recently started to offer lower fixed ‘teaser’ rates for a short period of time.

    Then after some time the interest rates jump up and become variable. Be careful to read
    the fine print.
• Most housing loans have a minimum lock in period of 3 years or more.
• Heavy penalty charges for pre payment
• Hidden fees include appraisal fees and other charges associated with the loan
• If you want to sell the house the loan becomes payable immediately

Reverse Mortgage
The whole idea of a reverse mortgage is entirely opposite to the regular mortgage process
where a person pays the bank for a mortgaged property. This concept is particularly popular
in the western countries.

Key Features
• A senior citizen who holds a house property, but lacks a regular source of income can put

    his property on mortgage with a bank or housing finance company. The bank/ housing
    finance company pays the person a regular payment
• The good thing is that the person who ‘reverse mortgages’ his property can stay in the
    house for his life and continue to receive the much needed regular payments. So effectively
    the property now pays for the owner.

18
• The way this works is that the bank will have the right to sell off the property after the
    incumbent passes away or leaves the place, and to recover the loan. It passes on any extra
    amount to the legal heir

Draft Guidelines of reverse mortgage in India prepared by RBI have the following salient
features:
• Any house owner over 60 years in eligible
• The maximum loan is upto 60% of the value of residential property
• The maximum period is 15 years
• The borrower can opt for monthly, quarterly, annual or lump sum payments at any point,

    as per his discretion
• The revaluation of the property has to be undertaken by the Bank or HFC once every 5

    years
• The amount received through reverse mortgage is considered as loan and not income
• Reverse mortgage rates can be fixed or floating and hence will vary according to market

    conditions depending on the interest rate regime chosen by the borrower

Loan against Securities
The main purpose of taking loans against shares is to preserve investment, apart from taking
care of personal needs. People also resort to such a loan to meet their contingencies and get
liquidity without actually selling the shares. It is advisable to take loan against securities only
when you are expecting a certain sum of money a few months down the line and you need
some funds in the interim.

Key Features
• RBI allows banks to lend up to 75% of the value of demat shares and 50 per cent of the

    value of physical shares. However, banks can, and do, fix their own limits with respect to
    the extent of funding within that range
• Banks have an approved list of securities that they lend against and this list varies from one
    lender to the other. This list also gets revised from time to time
• Loans against mutual fund units are based on their NAV value
• The amount of loan that you will get depends on the valuation of the security, applicable
    margin, your ability to service and repay the loan and other conditions
• Interest rates usually range between 14-18%
• Charges vary from bank to bank and usually include processing fees (1-1.5%) and
    documentation charges
• Only fully paid shares are accepted
• Scrips in the name of corporate, minors, Firms, HUF, and NRIs are not eligible for finance
    under this scheme

Credit Card Debt
Credit card debt is usually resorted to when all other option including personal loans are
exhausted. Credit card debt is unsecured therefore it carries very high interest rates. A credit
card gives you the power to spend money even when you don’t have the funds. Lots of young
people misuse it by spending on frivolous things

Stay away from credit card debt: Lots of young people are having problems with credit debt.
Paying only the minimum is costly and will ensure that you have debt for a long time. Try to
consistently pay as much as you are able towards your debts - you will be glad you did.

Key Features
• Interest rates on credit cards are probably the highest compared to other credit facilities.

    The interest ranges from 18-36% p.a
• Debt keeps accumulating via interest and penalties. If you are not paying off your

    outstanding balance before the interest free period expires then you will be paying a high
    interest rate. This can make it hard to reduce your credit card debt

                                                                                                                             19
• As most credit card limits are low some borrowers tend to neglect the fact that the interest
    payment is relatively small on a month to month basis. This is a dangerous practice because
    the amount of interest you pay can quickly jump to exceed the value of your actual debt

• Be very careful of having multiple cards and be very careful of taking up the marketing
    promotions from credit card providers when they actively try and get you to increase your
    credit card limit

Steps to Avoid Excess Debt
• Set debt limits

     • Decide how much you can afford to be in debt. Then, make sure that your total debt is
         below this amount

     • You may also want to set a limit on how much money out of each paycheck you are
         willing to spend on debts. Having this sort of limit can be very useful in ensuring that
         you do not overextend your credit

• Shop carefully for debts
     • If you do need a loan, be sure to do your research well. Always understand how much
         you will pay for your loan in interest and look for the lowest interest rates and the most
         affordable debt you can find. This will ensure that you do not end up overspending on
         interest rates
     • Once a year, check to make sure that you are still getting the best interest rates and
         best loan deals possible

• Don’t give into temptation
     • Once you show that you can handle some debt, many companies will be eager to offer
         you more credit. Companies may start sending you credit card offers and your lenders
         may offer you additional credit products
     • While it may be tempting to take out lots of new debt, you need to be wary of doing so.
         Only take out a loan or credit service when you really need to

• Automatically have money go towards your bills
     • Many banks and employers will allow you to have some money automatically deducted
         from your paycheck
     • This can be a great way to ensure that your bills get paid promptly. Plus, since you
         won’t even see the money, you are less likely to miss it

20
Securities and Exchange Board of India

For future financial education programs on any of the following modules:
1. School children
2. college students
3. Middle income group
4. Executives
5. Retirement planning
6. Home makers
7. Self help group
OR
Any of the following topics on securities markets namely;
1. How to read an offer document
2. How to invest in the primary market through stock exchanges.
3. How to trade in securities/guide to investors.
4. D-mat account and depositories.
5. Mutual funds-do’s and Dont’s
6. Collective investment schemes- Do’s and dont’s
7. Buy back of shares, delisting of securities,
8. Takeover regulations
9. Investor grievances-how to resolve it
Please write to SEBI at feprogram@sebi.gov.in
Or
DEPUTY GENERAL MANAGER
Investor Awareness Division
SEBI BHAVAN
Plot No - C4-A, G - Block
Bandra Kurla Complex Bandra (East)
Mumbai 400051
Tel: +91 022 26449142

                                                                                                                             21
                                Contact details of SEBI offices in India
                                              HEAD OFFICE
                                              SEBI BHAVAN

        Plot No.C4-A,’G’ Block, Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai 400051
    Tel: +91-22-26449000 / 40459000 / 9114 / Fax: +91-22-26449016-20 / 40459016-20

                                        E-mail: sebi@sebi.gov.in
(Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Goa, Diu, Daman and Dadra & Nagar Haveli)

                Northern Regional Office                               Southern Regional Office
           5th Floor, Bank of Baroda Building,                    D’ Monte Building, 3rd Floor, 32 D’
         16, Sansad Marg, New Delhi - 110 001.        Monte Colony, TTK Road, Alwarpet, Chennai: 600018.
  Tel: +91-11-23724001-05 / Fax: +91-11-23724006.                  Tel : +91-44-24674000/24674150

               E-mail : sebinro@sebi.gov.in                              Fax: +91-044-24674001
 (Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,                       E-mail : sebisro@sebi.gov.in
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Chandigarh, Uttarakhand and        (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu,
                                                        Pondicherry and Lakshwadeep & Minicoy Islands)
                             Delhi.)
                                                                     Ahmedabad Regional Office
                 Eastern Regional Office              Unit No: 002, Ground Floor SAKAR I, Near Gandhigram
      L&T Chambers, 3rd Floor, 16 Camac Street,
                                                        Railway Station, Opp. Nehru Bridge Ashram Road,
                      Kolkata - 700 017                                   Ahmedabad - 380 009
    Tel : +91-33-23023000 / Fax: +91-33-22874307.
                                                       Tel : +91 079-26583633-35 / Fax: +91 079-26583632
               E-mail : sebiero@sebi.gov.in                           E-mail : sebiaro@sebi.gov.in
(Assam, Bihar, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa,                     (Gujarat and Rajasthan)

 West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura,
Sikkim, Jharkhand and Andaman & Nicobar Islands)

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA
             PUBLISHED IN JULY, 2010
